content/en/blog/2023/kubecon-eu.md, before:

---
title: Join us for OpenTelemetry Talks and Activities at Kubecon EU 2023
linkTitle: Kubecon EU '23
date: 2023-03-30
spelling:
  cSpell:ignore Severin Neumann Pavol Loffay Kowall Aiven Vider Xiaochun Alolita
  Sharma Dyla Benedikt Bongartz Oliveira Pathak
author: '[Severin Neumann](https://github.com/svrnm)'
---

The OpenTelemetry project maintainers, and members of the governance committee
and technical committee are excited to be at [Kubecon EU][] in Amsterdam from
April 18 - 21, 2023!

You can meet us at the [project booth][], listen to our talks or learn with us
during workshops. We are looking forward to hear from you, how you are using
OpenTelemetry or contributing to the project.

Below you will find a list of talks and other activities related to
OpenTelemetry.

## Kubecon Talks and Maintainer Sessions

- **[Jaeger: The Future with OpenTelemetry and Metrics](https://sched.co/1HySf)**<br>
  by Pavol Loffay, Red Hat & Jonah Kowall, Aiven<br> Wednesday, April 19 •
  11:55 - 12:30
- **[Using OpenTelemetry for Application Security, with a Real Life Example](https://sched.co/1HyYT)**<br>
  by Ron Vider, Oxeye<br> Wednesday, April 19 • 11:55 - 12:30
- **[Understand Systems with OpenTelemetry: A Hybrid Telemetry Data Backend](https://sched.co/1Hyb2)**<br>
  by Ran Xu, Huawei & Xiaochun Yang, Northeastern University<br> Wednesday,
  April 19 • 14:30 - 15:05
- **[OTel Me About Metrics: A Metrics 101 Crash Course](https://sched.co/1Hya1)**<br>
  by Reese Lee, New Relic<br> Wednesday, April 19 • 17:25 - 18:00
- **[OpenTelemetry: Using Unified Semantics to Drive Insights + Project Update](https://sched.co/1HyS5)**<br>
  by Morgan McLean, Splunk, Alolita Sharma, Apple, Daniel Dyla, Dynatrace, & Ted
  Young, Lightstep<br> Thursday, April 20 • 16:30 - 17:05
- **[Tutorial: Exploring the Power of OpenTelemetry on Kubernetes](https://sched.co/1HyZ3)**<br>
  by Pavol Loffay, Benedikt Bongartz & Yuri Oliveira Sa, Red Hat, Severin
  Neumann, Cisco & Kristina Pathak, LightStep<br> Friday, April 21 • 16:00 -
  17:30

## Co-located Events

The [OpenTelemetry project meeting](https://sched.co/1JWS7) is to meet and
network with the OpenTelemetry maintainers and core contributors. This meeting
will be held 13:00 - 15:00 on Tuesday April 18, 2023. _This meeting can be
attended with the standard in-person pass and does not require an "all-access"
pass._

[Observability Day][] _fosters collaboration, discussion, and knowledge sharing
of cloud-native observability projects_. This event will be held on April 18,
2023 from 9:00 - 17:00. There will be several sessions on OpenTelemetry as well.
_This co-located event is not included in the general in-person pass but only in
the "in-person all-access" pass. See the
[Kubecon website](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/register/)
for more details._

## OpenTelemetry Project Booth

Drop by and say Hi! at the OpenTelemetry project booth in the Kubecon EU Project
Pavilion. If you’re lucky, you may even pick up some OpenTelemetry swag!

You will find us in the Solutions Showcase in Hall 5, Kiosk Number 20.

[The pavilion hours are][]:

- Wednesday, April 19: 10:30 – 21:00 (includes KubeCrawl + CloudNativeFest from
  18:00 – 21:00)
- Thursday, April 20: 10:30 – 17:30
- Friday, April 21: 10:30 – 14:30

We’re super excited to learn from all of you about your experience with
OpenTelemetry, how you are using OpenTelemetry, features you may need and issues
you may be running into when using OpenTelemetry.

Come join us to listen, learn and get involved in OpenTelemetry.

See you in Amsterdam!

[kubecon eu]: https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/
[project booth]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/program/project-engagement/#project-pavilion
[Observability Day]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/co-located-events/observability-day/
[The pavilion hours are]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/program/project-engagement/#project-pavilion

Commit message:

Kubecon to KubeCon
Signed-off-by: svrnm <neumanns@cisco.com>

content/en/blog/2023/kubecon-eu.md, after:

---
title: Join us for OpenTelemetry Talks and Activities at KubeCon EU 2023
linkTitle: KubeCon EU '23
date: 2023-03-30
spelling:
  cSpell:ignore Severin Neumann Pavol Loffay Kowall Aiven Vider Xiaochun Alolita
  Sharma Dyla Benedikt Bongartz Oliveira Pathak
author: '[Severin Neumann](https://github.com/svrnm)'
---

The OpenTelemetry project maintainers, and members of the governance committee
and technical committee are excited to be at [KubeCon EU][] in Amsterdam from
April 18 - 21, 2023!

You can meet us at the [project booth][], listen to our talks or learn with us
during workshops. We are looking forward to hear from you, how you are using
OpenTelemetry or contributing to the project.

Below you will find a list of talks and other activities related to
OpenTelemetry.

## KubeCon Talks and Maintainer Sessions

- **[Jaeger: The Future with OpenTelemetry and Metrics](https://sched.co/1HySf)**<br>
  by Pavol Loffay, Red Hat & Jonah Kowall, Aiven<br> Wednesday, April 19 •
  11:55 - 12:30
- **[Using OpenTelemetry for Application Security, with a Real Life Example](https://sched.co/1HyYT)**<br>
  by Ron Vider, Oxeye<br> Wednesday, April 19 • 11:55 - 12:30
- **[Understand Systems with OpenTelemetry: A Hybrid Telemetry Data Backend](https://sched.co/1Hyb2)**<br>
  by Ran Xu, Huawei & Xiaochun Yang, Northeastern University<br> Wednesday,
  April 19 • 14:30 - 15:05
- **[OTel Me About Metrics: A Metrics 101 Crash Course](https://sched.co/1Hya1)**<br>
  by Reese Lee, New Relic<br> Wednesday, April 19 • 17:25 - 18:00
- **[OpenTelemetry: Using Unified Semantics to Drive Insights + Project Update](https://sched.co/1HyS5)**<br>
  by Morgan McLean, Splunk, Alolita Sharma, Apple, Daniel Dyla, Dynatrace, & Ted
  Young, Lightstep<br> Thursday, April 20 • 16:30 - 17:05
- **[Tutorial: Exploring the Power of OpenTelemetry on Kubernetes](https://sched.co/1HyZ3)**<br>
  by Pavol Loffay, Benedikt Bongartz & Yuri Oliveira Sa, Red Hat, Severin
  Neumann, Cisco & Kristina Pathak, LightStep<br> Friday, April 21 • 16:00 -
  17:30

## Co-located Events

The [OpenTelemetry project meeting](https://sched.co/1JWS7) is to meet and
network with the OpenTelemetry maintainers and core contributors. This meeting
will be held 13:00 - 15:00 on Tuesday April 18, 2023. _This meeting can be
attended with the standard in-person pass and does not require an "all-access"
pass._

[Observability Day][] _fosters collaboration, discussion, and knowledge sharing
of cloud-native observability projects_. This event will be held on April 18,
2023 from 9:00 - 17:00. There will be several sessions on OpenTelemetry as well.
_This co-located event is not included in the general in-person pass but only in
the "in-person all-access" pass. See the
[KubeCon website](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/register/)
for more details._

## OpenTelemetry Project Booth

Drop by and say Hi! at the OpenTelemetry project booth in the KubeCon EU Project
Pavilion. If you’re lucky, you may even pick up some OpenTelemetry swag!

You will find us in the Solutions Showcase in Hall 5, Kiosk Number 20.

[The pavilion hours are][]:

- Wednesday, April 19: 10:30 – 21:00 (includes KubeCrawl + CloudNativeFest from
  18:00 – 21:00)
- Thursday, April 20: 10:30 – 17:30
- Friday, April 21: 10:30 – 14:30

We’re super excited to learn from all of you about your experience with
OpenTelemetry, how you are using OpenTelemetry, features you may need and issues
you may be running into when using OpenTelemetry.

Come join us to listen, learn and get involved in OpenTelemetry.

See you in Amsterdam!

[kubecon eu]: https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/
[project booth]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/program/project-engagement/#project-pavilion
[Observability Day]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/co-located-events/observability-day/
[The pavilion hours are]:
  https://events.linuxfoundation.org/kubecon-cloudnativecon-europe/program/project-engagement/#project-pavilion
