content/en/ecosystem/adopters.md, before:

---
title: Adopters
description: Organizations that use OpenTelemetry
# prettier-ignore
spelling: cSpell:ignore Dapr Datenrettungsdienste Globale Logicmonitor Logz Wandera Zocdoc Farfetch Uplight
# All spelling entries must be on a single line
---

A non-exhaustive, alphabetized list of
[end-user organizations](https://community.cncf.io/end-user-community/) that
have adopted OpenTelemetry. Also see [Vendors](../vendors/).

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
Organization                                      | Components                      |  Learn more
------------------------------------------------  | ------------------------------- |  ----------
[AppDirect](https://www.appdirect.com/)           | Collector                       |
[Care.com](https://www.care.com)                  | Collector, Go, Java, JS, .NET   |
[Cloud Scale](https://www.cloudscaleinc.com)      | Collector, Python    |
[EcoBee](https://www.ecobee.com/)                 | Collector, Java                 |  [blog post](https://www.honeycomb.io/blog/bees-working-together-how-ecobees-engineers-adopted-honeycomb-for-visibility-into-system-optimization-and-customer-experience)
[Farfetch](https://www.farfetch.com/)             | Collector, Java, .NET, Node.js, Python, Operator | [blog post](/blog/2023/end-user-q-and-a-03/)
[F5](https://www.f5.com/)                         | Collector.                      |
[OrderMyGear](https://www.ordermygear.com/)       |                                 |
[PITS Globale Datenrettungsdienste](https://www.pitsdatenrettung.de/) | Python      |
[Shopify](https://www.shopify.com/)               | Collector, Go, Ruby             |
[Transit](https://transitapp.com/)                |                                 |
[Uplight](https://uplight.com/)                   | Collector, Ruby, Java, Python, .NET | [blog post](/blog/2023/end-user-q-and-a-02/)
[Wandera](https://www.wandera.com/)               | Collector                       |
[Zocdoc](https://www.zocdoc.com/)                 |                                 |
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

To add your organization, edit this page and submit a PR. You will need to
include a link to a blog post that describes how your organization makes use of
OTel.

Commit message:

Major rework of ecosystem pages

content/en/ecosystem/adopters.md, after:

---
title: Adopters
description: Organizations that use OpenTelemetry
# prettier-ignore
spelling: cSpell:ignore Dapr Datenrettungsdienste Globale Logicmonitor Logz Wandera Zocdoc Farfetch Uplight
# All spelling entries must be on a single line
---

OpenTelemetry's mission is to to enable effective observability for all its
end-users. If you thinking about adopting OpenTelemetry for your organization,
you may be curious how other adoption journeys looked like. On this page you can
find a non-exhaustive list of
[end-user organizations](https://community.cncf.io/end-user-community/) that
have adopted OpenTelemetry for
[Observability](/docs/concepts/observability-primer/).

{{% ecosystem/adopters-table %}}

To have your organization included,
[add an entry to the list](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/tree/main/data/ecosystem/adopters.yaml)
and submit a PR.

You will need to include[^existing-entries]:

- a link to a blog post that describes how your organization makes use of
  OpenTelemetry.
- a point of contact (GitHub handle or email address), we can reach out for
  future inquiries.

Note, that this list is for organizations that adopt OpenTelemetry for
Observability as an end user and do not provide any kind of services around
OpenTelemetry themselves.

If you provide a library or service made observable through OpenTelemetry, see
[Integrators](/ecosystem/integrations). <br /> If you provide a solution that consumes
OpenTelemetry to offer Observability to end users, see [Vendors](/ecosystem/vendors).

[^existing-entries]:
    Organizations that have been part of this list before July 2023 are exempted
    from these requirements until January, 1th 2024.
