content/en/ecosystem/registry/_index.md, before:

---
title: Registry
description: >-
  Find libraries, plugins, integrations, and other useful tools for extending
  OpenTelemetry.
aliases:
  # Catch-all for old registry entries; we don't publish individual entry pages anymore.
  - /ecosystem/registry/*
  - /registry/*
type: default
layout: registry
outputs: [html, json]
body_class: registry
weight: 20
---

{{% blocks/lead color="white" %}}

<!-- markdownlint-disable single-h1 -->

# {{% param title %}}

{{% param description %}}

{{% /blocks/lead %}}

{{% blocks/section color="dark" %}}

## What do you need?

The OpenTelemetry Registry allows you to search for instrumentation libraries,
tracer implementations, utilities, and other useful projects in the
OpenTelemetry ecosystem.

- Not able to find an exporter for your language? Remember, the
  [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector) supports exporting to a variety of
  systems and works with all OpenTelemetry Core Components!
- Are you a project maintainer? See,
  [Adding a project to the OpenTelemetry Registry](adding).
- Check back regularly, the community and registry are growing!

{{% /blocks/section %}}

{{< blocks/section color="white" type="container-lg" >}}

{{<registry-search-form>}}

{{< /blocks/section >}}

Commit message:

Add page redirects feature and fix registry catch-all

content/en/ecosystem/registry/_index.md, after:

---
title: Registry
description: >-
  Find libraries, plugins, integrations, and other useful tools for extending
  OpenTelemetry.
# The redirects and aliases implement catch-all rules for old registry entries;
# we don't publish individual entry pages anymore.
#
# We can't use the catch-all `/ecosystem/registry/*`, because that creates a
# self-loop with `/ecosystem/registry/index.html`. So we use the following
# redirect rule to avoid the loop, as suggested by Netlify support
# (email support ID 159489):
redirects: [{ from: ./*, to: '?' }]
aliases: [/registry/*]
type: default
layout: registry
outputs: [html, json]
body_class: registry
weight: 20
---

{{% blocks/lead color="white" %}}

<!-- markdownlint-disable single-h1 -->

# {{% param title %}}

{{% param description %}}

{{% /blocks/lead %}}

{{% blocks/section color="dark" %}}

## What do you need?

The OpenTelemetry Registry allows you to search for instrumentation libraries,
tracer implementations, utilities, and other useful projects in the
OpenTelemetry ecosystem.

- Not able to find an exporter for your language? Remember, the
  [OpenTelemetry Collector](/docs/collector) supports exporting to a variety of
  systems and works with all OpenTelemetry Core Components!
- Are you a project maintainer? See,
  [Adding a project to the OpenTelemetry Registry](adding).
- Check back regularly, the community and registry are growing!

{{% /blocks/section %}}

{{< blocks/section color="white" type="container-lg" >}}

{{<registry-search-form>}}

{{< /blocks/section >}}
