content/en/blog/2023/otterize-otel/index.md, before:

---
title: "Adding OpenTelemetry support to the Otterize network mapper"
linkTitle: "OTel and Otterize" # Mandatory, make sure that your short title.
date: 2023-11-15 # Put the current date, we will keep the date updated until your PR is merged
author: "Ori Shoshan" >- # If you have only one author, then add the single name on this line in quotes.
  [Ori Shoshan](https://github.com/orishoshan) (Otterize),
---

# A no-brainer integration: Adding OpenTelemetry support to the Otterize network mapper

**By Otterize**

[Otterize](https://otterize.com/) automates workload IAM for zero-trust,
automating policies like Kubernetes network policies, Istio policies, AWS IAM
policies, and more, through a collection of
[open source projects](https://github.com/otterize). To enable that automation,
Otterize built the [network mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper).
The Otterize network mapper is a standalone Kubernetes tool that builds a live
network map of your infrastructure, and can visualize it into an image file, as
an interactive graph on Otterize Cloud, or export it as ClientIntents, a custom
Kubernetes resource that describes each workload’s required access, or their
“intentions”. It’s designed to be a zero-config deployment that immediately
provides a network map, along with being light on resource use, and requiring
the lowest privileges possible. At its core, it collects DNS traffic and
analyzes it to figure out what communications look like.

The awesome folks at
[ServiceNow Cloud Observability](https://www.servicenow.com/products/observability.html)
(formerly Lightstep)
[recently contributed OpenTelemetry exporting support to the network mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper/pull/141).
This means that you can now use the network mapper to generate a network map of
your infrastructure, and export OpenTelemetry data to a Grafana Tempo instance,
to see a service graph without making any changes to the services deployed in
your cluster.

[Official screenshot of Grafana Tempo service graph](otterize-otel.png)

This integration was simple: the OpenTelemetry SDK is easy to use and fits like
a glove into the existing network mapper code.

## How does OpenTelemetry work with the network mapper?

With the service graph, you'll be able to see what services are communicating
with each other. You can then use that information for operational or security
needs, such as determining the blast radius of a downtime or security incident.
You can use the service graph to figure out where to start rolling out
OpenTelemetry tracing, as that deployment tends to be more involved and requires
the integration of the OpenTelemetry SDK into your  source code.

While it was easy to use the OTel SDK for the network mapper, we can see why
there's a bit of a chicken-and-egg problem here when you're looking into
OpenTelemetry—to start seeing significant value with tracing, you really need to
see a bunch of services together, and that can be a lot to do as your first
step.

Since the network mapper doesn’t require you to change any of your existing
application code, the barrier to entry for getting started with OpenTelemetry is
significantly reduced. This is a great way to get started with emitting
OpenTelemetry metrics for each service in your infrastructure and to
understanding how your services interact with each other, before committing to a
more significant OpenTelemetry rollout.

## The strength of open source in action!

We never initially contemplated adding this feature because it didn't cross our
minds, but its value is undeniable—particularly for those deploying the network
mapper and utilizing Grafana Tempo, or individuals exploring OpenTelemetry.

It's great that the ServiceNow Cloud Observability Team stumbled upon the
network mapper and graciously contributed this enhancement, making the network
mapper seamlessly integrate with OpenTelemetry and Grafana. This is the beauty
of open source collaboration!

If you're interested in exploring or contributing to our project, head on over
to
[https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper),
and perhaps, while you're there, drop us a star! Otterize proudly stands as a
member of the CNCF.

Commit message:

updated to conform with proper format

content/en/blog/2023/otterize-otel/index.md, after:

---
title: "Adding OpenTelemetry support to the Otterize network mapper"
linkTitle: "Open Telemetry with Otterize" # Mandatory, make sure that your short title.
date: 2023-11-15 # Put the current date, we will keep the date updated until your PR is merged
author: >- # If you have only one author, then add the single name on this line in quotes.
  [Ori Shoshan](https://github.com/orishoshan) (Otterize),
  [David G. Simmons](https://github.com/davidgs) (Otterize)
---

# A no-brainer integration: Adding OpenTelemetry support to the Otterize network mapper

**By Otterize**

[Otterize](https://otterize.com/) automates workload IAM for zero-trust,
automating policies like Kubernetes network policies, Istio policies, AWS IAM
policies, and more, through a collection of
[open source projects](https://github.com/otterize). To enable that automation,
Otterize built the [network mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper).
The Otterize network mapper is a standalone Kubernetes tool that builds a live
network map of your infrastructure, and can visualize it into an image file, as
an interactive graph on Otterize Cloud, or export it as ClientIntents, a custom
Kubernetes resource that describes each workload’s required access, or their
“intentions”. It’s designed to be a zero-config deployment that immediately
provides a network map, along with being light on resource use, and requiring
the lowest privileges possible. At its core, it collects DNS traffic and
analyzes it to figure out what communications look like.

The awesome folks at
[ServiceNow Cloud Observability](https://www.servicenow.com/products/observability.html)
(formerly Lightstep)
[recently contributed OpenTelemetry exporting support to the network mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper/pull/141).
This means that you can now use the network mapper to generate a network map of
your infrastructure, and export OpenTelemetry data to a Grafana Tempo instance,
to see a service graph without making any changes to the services deployed in
your cluster.

[Official screenshot of Grafana Tempo service graph](otterize-otel.png)

This integration was simple: the OpenTelemetry SDK is easy to use and fits like
a glove into the existing network mapper code.

## How does OpenTelemetry work with the network mapper?

With the service graph, you'll be able to see what services are communicating
with each other. You can then use that information for operational or security
needs, such as determining the blast radius of a downtime or security incident.
You can use the service graph to figure out where to start rolling out
OpenTelemetry tracing, as that deployment tends to be more involved and requires
the integration of the OpenTelemetry SDK into your  source code.

While it was easy to use the OTel SDK for the network mapper, we can see why
there's a bit of a chicken-and-egg problem here when you're looking into
OpenTelemetry—to start seeing significant value with tracing, you really need to
see a bunch of services together, and that can be a lot to do as your first
step.

Since the network mapper doesn’t require you to change any of your existing
application code, the barrier to entry for getting started with OpenTelemetry is
significantly reduced. This is a great way to get started with emitting
OpenTelemetry metrics for each service in your infrastructure and to
understanding how your services interact with each other, before committing to a
more significant OpenTelemetry rollout.

## The strength of open source in action!

We never initially contemplated adding this feature because it didn't cross our
minds, but its value is undeniable—particularly for those deploying the network
mapper and utilizing Grafana Tempo, or individuals exploring OpenTelemetry.

It's great that the ServiceNow Cloud Observability Team stumbled upon the
network mapper and graciously contributed this enhancement, making the network
mapper seamlessly integrate with OpenTelemetry and Grafana. This is the beauty
of open source collaboration!

If you're interested in exploring or contributing to our project, head on over
to
[https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper](https://github.com/otterize/network-mapper),
and perhaps, while you're there, drop us a star! Otterize proudly stands as a
member of the CNCF.
