content/en/docs/k8s-operator/automatic.md, before:

---
title: Injecting Auto-instrumentation
linkTitle: Auto-instrumentation
weight: 11
description:
  An implementation of auto-instrumentation using the OpenTelemetry Operator.
spelling: cSpell:ignore Otel
---

The OpenTelemetry Operator supports injecting and configuring
auto-instrumentation libraries for .NET, Java, Node.js and Python services.

## Installation

First, install the
[OpenTelemetry Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator)
into your cluster.

You can do this with the
[Operator release manifest](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator#getting-started),
the
[Operator helm chart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-operator#opentelemetry-operator-helm-chart),
or with [Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/opentelemetry-operator).

In most cases, you will need to install
[cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/). If you use the helm
chart, there is an option to generate a self-signed cert instead.

## Create an OpenTelemetry Collector (Optional)

It is a best practice to send telemetry from containers to an
[OpenTelemetry Collector](../../collector/) instead of directly to a backend.
The Collector helps simplify secret management, decouples data export problems
(such as a need to do retries) from your apps, and lets you add additional data
to your telemetry, such as with the
[k8sattributesprocessor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor)
component. If you chose not to use a Collector, you can skip to the next
section.

The Operator provides a
[Custom Resource Definition (CRD) for the OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector)
which is used to create an instance of the Collector that the Operator manages.
The following example deploys the Collector as a deployment (the default), but
there are other
[deployment modes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator#deployment-modes)
that can be used.

When using the `Deployment` mode the operator will also create a Service that
can be used to interact with the Collector. The name of the service is the name
of the `OpenTelemetryCollector` resource prepended to `-collector`. For our
example that will be `demo-collector`.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: demo
spec:
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:
    processors:
      memory_limiter:
        check_interval: 1s
        limit_percentage: 75
        spike_limit_percentage: 15
      batch:
        send_batch_size: 10000
        timeout: 10s

    exporters:
      logging:

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
EOF
```

The above command results in a deployment of the Collector that you can use as
an endpoint for auto-instrumentation in your pods.

## Configure Autoinstrumentation

To be able to manage autoinstrumentation, the Operator needs to be configured to
know what pods to instrument and which autoinstrumentation to use for those
pods. This is done via the
[Instrumentation CRD](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#instrumentation).

Creating the Instrumentation resource correctly is paramount to getting
auto-instrumentation working. Making sure all endpoints and env vars are correct
is required for auto-instrumentation to work properly.

### .NET

The following command will create a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured specifically for instrumenting .NET services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments .NET services
uses `otlp` with the `http/protobuf` protocol. This means that the configured
endpoint must be able to receive OTLP over `http/protobuf`. Therefore, the
example uses `http://demo-collector:4318`, which will connect to the `http` port
of the otlpreceiver of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the .NET auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/config.md#instrumentations).
This makes instrumentation easy, but could result in too much or unwanted data.
If there are any libraries you do not want to use you can set the
`OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_[SIGNAL]_[NAME]_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=false` where
`[SIGNAL]` is the type of the signal and `[NAME]` is the case-sensitive name of
the library.

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  dotnet:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_TRACES_GRPCNETCLIENT_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED
        value: false
      - name: OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_METRICS_PROCESS_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED
        value: false
```

For more details, see
[.NET Auto Instrumentation docs](/docs/instrumentation/net/automatic/).

### Java

The following command creates a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured for instrumenting Java services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments Java services
uses `otlp` with the `grpc` protocol. This means that the configured endpoint
must be able to receive OTLP over `grpc`. Therefore, the example uses
`http://demo-collector:4317`, which connects to the `grpc` port of the
otlpreceiver of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the Java auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/#supported-libraries-frameworks-application-services-and-jvms).
This makes instrumentation easy, but could result in too much or unwanted data.
If there are any libraries you do not want to use you can set the
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_[NAME]_ENABLED=false` where `[NAME]` is the name of the
library. If you know exactly which libraries you want to use, you can disable
the default libraries by setting
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_COMMON_DEFAULT_ENABLED=false` and then use
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_[NAME]_ENABLED=true` where `[NAME]` is the name of the
library. For more details, see
[Suppressing specific auto-instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/#suppressing-specific-auto-instrumentation).

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  java:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_KAFKA_ENABLED
        value: false
      - name: OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_REDISCALA_ENABLED
        value: false
```

For more details, see
[Java Agent Configuration](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/).

### Node.js

The following command creates a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured for instrumenting Node.js services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments Node.js services
uses `otlp` with the `grpc` protocol. This means that the configured endpoint
must be able to receive OTLP over `grpc`. Therefore, the example uses
`http://demo-collector:4317`, which connects to the `grpc` port of the
otlpreceiver of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the Node.js auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/blob/main/metapackages/auto-instrumentations-node/README.md#supported-instrumentations).
At the moment, there is no way to opt-in to only specific packages or disable
specific packages. If you don't want to use a package included by the default
image you must either supply your own image that includes only the packages you
want or use manual instrumentation.

For more details, see
[Node.js auto-instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/js/libraries/#node-autoinstrumentation-package).

### Python

The following command will create a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured specifically for instrumenting Python services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments python services
uses `otlp` with the `http/protobuf` protocol. This means that the configured
endpoint must be able to receive OTLP over `http/protobuf`. Therefore, the
example uses `http://demo-collector:4318`, which will connect to the `http` port
of the otlpreceiver of the Collector created in the previous step.

> As of operator v0.67.0, the Instrumentation resource automatically sets
> `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_PROTOCOL` and `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_PROTOCOL`
> to `http/protobuf` for Python services. If you use an older version of the
> Operator you **MUST** set these env variables to `http/protobuf`, or python
> auto-instrumentation will not work.

By default the Python auto-instrumentation will detect the packages in your
Python service and instrument anything it can. This makes instrumentation easy,
but can result in too much or unwanted data. If there are any packages you do
not want to instrument, you can set the `OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS`
environment variable

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  python:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS
        value:
          <comma-separated list of package names to exclude from
          instrumentation>
```

[See the Python Agent Configuration docs for more details.](/docs/instrumentation/python/automatic/agent-config/#disabling-specific-instrumentations)

---

Now that your Instrumentation object is created, your cluster has the ability to
auto-instrument services and send data to an endpoint. However,
auto-instrumentation with the OpenTelemetry Operator follows an opt-in model. In
order to activate autoinstrumentation, you'll need to add an annotation to your
deployment.

## Add annotations to existing deployments

The final step is to opt in your services to autoinstrumentation. This is done
by updating your service’s `spec.template.metadata.annotations` to include a
language-specific annotation:

- .NET: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-dotnet: "true"`
- Java: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-java: "true"`
- Node.js: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs: "true"`
- Python: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: "true"`

The possible values for the annotation can be

- `"true"` - to inject `Instrumentation` resource with default name from the
  current namespace.
- `"my-instrumentation"` - to inject `Instrumentation` CR instance with name
  `"my-instrumentation"` in the current namespace.
- `"my-other-namespace/my-instrumentation"` - to inject `Instrumentation` CR
  instance with name `"my-instrumentation"` from another namespace
  `"my-other-namespace"`.
- `"false"` - do not inject

Alternatively, the annotation can be added to a namespace, which will result in
all services in that namespace to opt-in to autoinstrumentation. See the
[Operators auto-instrumentation documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/README.md#opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-injection)
for more details.

Commit message:

cSpell fixes for some pages (operator, faas, acknowledgement, opencensus, what is otel) (#2934)

content/en/docs/k8s-operator/automatic.md, after:

---
title: Injecting Auto-instrumentation
linkTitle: Auto-instrumentation
weight: 11
description:
  An implementation of auto-instrumentation using the OpenTelemetry Operator.
spelling:
  cSpell:ignore otlpreceiver k8sattributesprocessor GRPCNETCLIENT REDISCALA
---

The OpenTelemetry Operator supports injecting and configuring
auto-instrumentation libraries for .NET, Java, Node.js and Python services.

## Installation

First, install the
[OpenTelemetry Operator](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator)
into your cluster.

You can do this with the
[Operator release manifest](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator#getting-started),
the
[Operator helm chart](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-helm-charts/tree/main/charts/opentelemetry-operator#opentelemetry-operator-helm-chart),
or with [Operator Hub](https://operatorhub.io/operator/opentelemetry-operator).

In most cases, you will need to install
[cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/docs/installation/). If you use the helm
chart, there is an option to generate a self-signed cert instead.

## Create an OpenTelemetry Collector (Optional)

It is a best practice to send telemetry from containers to an
[OpenTelemetry Collector](../../collector/) instead of directly to a backend.
The Collector helps simplify secret management, decouples data export problems
(such as a need to do retries) from your apps, and lets you add additional data
to your telemetry, such as with the
[k8sattributesprocessor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/processor/k8sattributesprocessor)
component. If you chose not to use a Collector, you can skip to the next
section.

The Operator provides a
[Custom Resource Definition (CRD) for the OpenTelemetry Collector](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#opentelemetrycollector)
which is used to create an instance of the Collector that the Operator manages.
The following example deploys the Collector as a deployment (the default), but
there are other
[deployment modes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator#deployment-modes)
that can be used.

When using the `Deployment` mode the operator will also create a Service that
can be used to interact with the Collector. The name of the service is the name
of the `OpenTelemetryCollector` resource prepended to `-collector`. For our
example that will be `demo-collector`.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: demo
spec:
  config: |
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:
    processors:
      memory_limiter:
        check_interval: 1s
        limit_percentage: 75
        spike_limit_percentage: 15
      batch:
        send_batch_size: 10000
        timeout: 10s

    exporters:
      logging:

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
        logs:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: [memory_limiter, batch]
          exporters: [logging]
EOF
```

The above command results in a deployment of the Collector that you can use as
an endpoint for auto-instrumentation in your pods.

## Configure Automatic Instrumentation

To be able to manage automatic instrumentation, the Operator needs to be
configured to know what pods to instrument and which automatic instrumentation
to use for those pods. This is done via the
[Instrumentation CRD](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/docs/api.md#instrumentation).

Creating the Instrumentation resource correctly is paramount to getting
auto-instrumentation working. Making sure all endpoints and env vars are correct
is required for auto-instrumentation to work properly.

### .NET

The following command will create a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured specifically for instrumenting .NET services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments .NET services
uses `otlp` with the `http/protobuf` protocol. This means that the configured
endpoint must be able to receive OTLP over `http/protobuf`. Therefore, the
example uses `http://demo-collector:4318`, which will connect to the `http` port
of the `otlpreceiver` of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the .NET auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-dotnet-instrumentation/blob/main/docs/config.md#instrumentations).
This makes instrumentation easy, but could result in too much or unwanted data.
If there are any libraries you do not want to use you can set the
`OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_[SIGNAL]_[NAME]_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED=false` where
`[SIGNAL]` is the type of the signal and `[NAME]` is the case-sensitive name of
the library.

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  dotnet:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_TRACES_GRPCNETCLIENT_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED
        value: false
      - name: OTEL_DOTNET_AUTO_METRICS_PROCESS_INSTRUMENTATION_ENABLED
        value: false
```

For more details, see
[.NET Auto Instrumentation docs](/docs/instrumentation/net/automatic/).

### Java

The following command creates a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured for instrumenting Java services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments Java services
uses `otlp` with the `grpc` protocol. This means that the configured endpoint
must be able to receive OTLP over `grpc`. Therefore, the example uses
`http://demo-collector:4317`, which connects to the `grpc` port of the
otlpreceiver of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the Java auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/#supported-libraries-frameworks-application-services-and-jvms).
This makes instrumentation easy, but could result in too much or unwanted data.
If there are any libraries you do not want to use you can set the
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_[NAME]_ENABLED=false` where `[NAME]` is the name of the
library. If you know exactly which libraries you want to use, you can disable
the default libraries by setting
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_COMMON_DEFAULT_ENABLED=false` and then use
`OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_[NAME]_ENABLED=true` where `[NAME]` is the name of the
library. For more details, see
[Suppressing specific auto-instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/#suppressing-specific-auto-instrumentation).

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  java:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_KAFKA_ENABLED
        value: false
      - name: OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_REDISCALA_ENABLED
        value: false
```

For more details, see
[Java Agent Configuration](/docs/instrumentation/java/automatic/agent-config/).

### Node.js

The following command creates a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured for instrumenting Node.js services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4317
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments Node.js services
uses `otlp` with the `grpc` protocol. This means that the configured endpoint
must be able to receive OTLP over `grpc`. Therefore, the example uses
`http://demo-collector:4317`, which connects to the `grpc` port of the
`otlpreceiver` of the Collector created in the previous step.

By default, the Node.js auto-instrumentation ships with
[many instrumentation libraries](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js-contrib/blob/main/metapackages/auto-instrumentations-node/README.md#supported-instrumentations).
At the moment, there is no way to opt-in to only specific packages or disable
specific packages. If you don't want to use a package included by the default
image you must either supply your own image that includes only the packages you
want or use manual instrumentation.

For more details, see
[Node.js auto-instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/js/libraries/#node-autoinstrumentation-package).

### Python

The following command will create a basic Instrumentation resource that is
configured specifically for instrumenting Python services.

```bash
kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: "1"
EOF
```

By default, the Instrumentation resource that auto-instruments python services
uses `otlp` with the `http/protobuf` protocol. This means that the configured
endpoint must be able to receive OTLP over `http/protobuf`. Therefore, the
example uses `http://demo-collector:4318`, which will connect to the `http` port
of the `otlpreceiver` of the Collector created in the previous step.

> As of operator v0.67.0, the Instrumentation resource automatically sets
> `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_PROTOCOL` and `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_PROTOCOL`
> to `http/protobuf` for Python services. If you use an older version of the
> Operator you **MUST** set these env variables to `http/protobuf`, or python
> auto-instrumentation will not work.

By default the Python auto-instrumentation will detect the packages in your
Python service and instrument anything it can. This makes instrumentation easy,
but can result in too much or unwanted data. If there are any packages you do
not want to instrument, you can set the `OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS`
environment variable

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: Instrumentation
metadata:
  name: demo-instrumentation
spec:
  exporter:
    endpoint: http://demo-collector:4318
  propagators:
    - tracecontext
    - baggage
  sampler:
    type: parentbased_traceidratio
    argument: '1'
  python:
    env:
      - name: OTEL_PYTHON_DISABLED_INSTRUMENTATIONS
        value:
          <comma-separated list of package names to exclude from
          instrumentation>
```

[See the Python Agent Configuration docs for more details.](/docs/instrumentation/python/automatic/agent-config/#disabling-specific-instrumentations)

---

Now that your Instrumentation object is created, your cluster has the ability to
auto-instrument services and send data to an endpoint. However,
auto-instrumentation with the OpenTelemetry Operator follows an opt-in model. In
order to activate automatic instrumentation, you'll need to add an annotation to
your deployment.

## Add annotations to existing deployments

The final step is to opt in your services to automatic instrumentation. This is
done by updating your service’s `spec.template.metadata.annotations` to include
a language-specific annotation:

- .NET: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-dotnet: "true"`
- Java: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-java: "true"`
- Node.js: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-nodejs: "true"`
- Python: `instrumentation.opentelemetry.io/inject-python: "true"`

The possible values for the annotation can be

- `"true"` - to inject `Instrumentation` resource with default name from the
  current namespace.
- `"my-instrumentation"` - to inject `Instrumentation` CR instance with name
  `"my-instrumentation"` in the current namespace.
- `"my-other-namespace/my-instrumentation"` - to inject `Instrumentation` CR
  instance with name `"my-instrumentation"` from another namespace
  `"my-other-namespace"`.
- `"false"` - do not inject

Alternatively, the annotation can be added to a namespace, which will result in
all services in that namespace to opt-in to automatic instrumentation. See the
[Operators auto-instrumentation documentation](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/blob/main/README.md#opentelemetry-auto-instrumentation-injection)
for more details.
