content/en/docs/instrumentation/js/getting-started/nodejs.md, before:

---
title: Node.js
description: Get telemetry for your app in less than 5 minutes!
aliases: [/docs/js/getting_started/nodejs]
cSpell:ignore: autoinstrumentation autoinstrumentations KHTML rolldice
weight: 10
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in Node.js.

You will learn how you can instrument a simple application automatically, in
such a way that [traces][], [metrics][] and [logs][] are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
- [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/download), if you will be using
  TypeScript.

## Example Application

The following example uses a basic [Express](https://expressjs.com/)
application. If you are not using Express, that's OK — you can use OpenTelemetry
JavaScript with other web frameworks as well, such as Koa and Nest.JS. For a
complete list of libraries for supported frameworks, see the
[registry](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=js).

For more elaborate examples, see [examples](/docs/instrumentation/js/examples/).

### Dependencies

To begin, set up an empty `package.json` in a new directory:

```shell
npm init -y
```

Next, install Express dependencies.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
npm install typescript \
  ts-node \
  @types/node \
  express \
  @types/express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
npm install express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

Create a file named `app.ts` (or `app.js` if not using TypeScript) and add the
following code to it:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*app.ts*/
import express, { Express } from "express";

const PORT: number = parseInt(process.env.PORT || "8080");
const app: Express = express();

function getRandomNumber(min: number, max: number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  res.send(getRandomNumber(1, 6).toString());
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*app.js*/
const express = require("express");

const PORT = parseInt(process.env.PORT || "8080");
const app = express();

function getRandomNumber(min, max) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  res.send(getRandomNumber(1, 6).toString());
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Run the application with the following command and open
<http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your web browser to ensure it is working.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=console >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

## Instrumentation

The following shows how to install, initialize, and run an application
instrumented with OpenTelemetry.

### More Dependencies

First, install the Node SDK and autoinstrumentations package.

The Node SDK lets you initialize OpenTelemetry with several configuration
defaults that are correct for the majority of use cases.

The `auto-instrumentations-node` package installs instrumentation packages that
will automatically create spans corresponding to code called in libraries. In
this case, it provides instrumentation for Express, letting the example app
automatically create spans for each incoming request.

```shell
npm install @opentelemetry/sdk-node \
  @opentelemetry/api \
  @opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node \
  @opentelemetry/sdk-metrics
```

To find all autoinstrumentation modules, you can look at the
[registry](/ecosystem/registry/?language=js&component=instrumentation).

### Setup

The instrumentation setup and configuration must be run _before_ your
application code. One tool commonly used for this task is the
[--require](https://nodejs.org/api/cli.html#-r---require-module) flag.

Create a file named `instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js` if not using
TypeScript) , which will contain your instrumentation setup code.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import { ConsoleSpanExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node';
import { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } from '@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node';
import { PeriodicExportingMetricReader, ConsoleMetricExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics';

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
});

sdk
  .start()

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.js*/
// Require dependencies
const { NodeSDK } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-node');
const { ConsoleSpanExporter } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node');
const { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } = require('@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node');
const { PeriodicExportingMetricReader, ConsoleMetricExporter } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics');

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
});

sdk
  .start()
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

## Run the instrumented app

Now you can run your application as you normally would, but you can use the
`--require` flag to load the instrumentation before the application code.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=console >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node --require ./instrumentation.ts app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your web browser and reload the page a
few times. After a while you should see the spans printed in the console by the
`ConsoleSpanExporter`.

<details>
<summary>View example output</summary>

```json
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "middleware - query",
  "id": "41a27f331c7bfed3",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589722992,
  "duration": 417,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "query",
    "express.type": "middleware"
  },
  "status": { "code": 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "middleware - expressInit",
  "id": "e0ed537a699f652a",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589725778,
  "duration": 673,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "expressInit",
    "express.type": "middleware"
  },
  "status": { code: 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "request handler - /",
  "id": "8614a81e1847b7ef",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589726941,
  "duration": 21,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "/",
    "express.type": "request_handler"
  },
  "status": { code: 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": undefined,
  "name": "GET /",
  "id": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "kind": 1,
  "timestamp": 1624982589720260,
  "duration": 11380,
  "attributes": {
    "http.url": "http://localhost:8080/",
    "http.host": "localhost:8080",
    "net.host.name": "localhost",
    "http.method": "GET",
    "http.route": "",
    "http.target": "/",
    "http.user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_15_7) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/91.0.4472.114 Safari/537.36",
    "http.flavor": "1.1",
    "net.transport": "ip_tcp",
    "net.host.ip": "::1",
    "net.host.port": 8080,
    "net.peer.ip": "::1",
    "net.peer.port": 61520,
    "http.status_code": 304,
    "http.status_text": "NOT MODIFIED"
  },
  "status": { "code": 1 },
  "events": []
}
```

</details>

The generated span tracks the lifetime of a request to the `/rolldice` route.

Send a few more requests to the endpoint. After a moment, you'll see metrics in
the console output, such as the following:

<details>
<summary>View example output</summary>

```yaml
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
```

</details>

## Next Steps

Enrich your instrumentation generated automatically with
[manual instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/js/manual) of your own codebase.
This gets you customized observability data.

You'll also want to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export your telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/js/exporters) to one or more
telemetry backends.

## Troubleshooting

Did something go wrong? You can enable diagnostic logging to validate that
OpenTelemetry is initialized correctly:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { diag, DiagConsoleLogger, DiagLogLevel } from '@opentelemetry/api';

// For troubleshooting, set the log level to DiagLogLevel.DEBUG
diag.setLogger(new DiagConsoleLogger(), DiagLogLevel.INFO);

// const sdk = new NodeSDK({...
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.js*/
// Require dependencies
const { diag, DiagConsoleLogger, DiagLogLevel } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

// For troubleshooting, set the log level to DiagLogLevel.DEBUG
diag.setLogger(new DiagConsoleLogger(), DiagLogLevel.INFO);

// const sdk = new NodeSDK({...
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

[traces]: /docs/concepts/signals/traces/
[metrics]: /docs/concepts/signals/metrics/
[logs]: /docs/concepts/signals/logs/

Commit message:

add links to demo services from getting started pages
Signed-off-by: svrnm <neumanns@cisco.com>

content/en/docs/instrumentation/js/getting-started/nodejs.md, after:

---
title: Node.js
description: Get telemetry for your app in less than 5 minutes!
aliases: [/docs/js/getting_started/nodejs]
cSpell:ignore: autoinstrumentation autoinstrumentations KHTML rolldice
weight: 10
---

This page will show you how to get started with OpenTelemetry in Node.js.

You will learn how you can instrument a simple application automatically, in
such a way that [traces][], [metrics][] and [logs][] are emitted to the console.

## Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the following installed locally:

- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/)
- [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/download), if you will be using
  TypeScript.

## Example Application

The following example uses a basic [Express](https://expressjs.com/)
application. If you are not using Express, that's OK — you can use OpenTelemetry
JavaScript with other web frameworks as well, such as Koa and Nest.JS. For a
complete list of libraries for supported frameworks, see the
[registry](/ecosystem/registry/?component=instrumentation&language=js).

For more elaborate examples, see [examples](/docs/instrumentation/js/examples/).

### Dependencies

To begin, set up an empty `package.json` in a new directory:

```shell
npm init -y
```

Next, install Express dependencies.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=shell >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
npm install typescript \
  ts-node \
  @types/node \
  express \
  @types/express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
npm install express
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

Create a file named `app.ts` (or `app.js` if not using TypeScript) and add the
following code to it:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*app.ts*/
import express, { Express } from "express";

const PORT: number = parseInt(process.env.PORT || "8080");
const app: Express = express();

function getRandomNumber(min: number, max: number) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  res.send(getRandomNumber(1, 6).toString());
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*app.js*/
const express = require("express");

const PORT = parseInt(process.env.PORT || "8080");
const app = express();

function getRandomNumber(min, max) {
  return Math.floor(Math.random() * (max - min) + min);
}

app.get("/rolldice", (req, res) => {
  res.send(getRandomNumber(1, 6).toString());
});

app.listen(PORT, () => {
  console.log(`Listening for requests on http://localhost:${PORT}`);
});
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane>}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Run the application with the following command and open
<http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your web browser to ensure it is working.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=console >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

## Instrumentation

The following shows how to install, initialize, and run an application
instrumented with OpenTelemetry.

### More Dependencies

First, install the Node SDK and autoinstrumentations package.

The Node SDK lets you initialize OpenTelemetry with several configuration
defaults that are correct for the majority of use cases.

The `auto-instrumentations-node` package installs instrumentation packages that
will automatically create spans corresponding to code called in libraries. In
this case, it provides instrumentation for Express, letting the example app
automatically create spans for each incoming request.

```shell
npm install @opentelemetry/sdk-node \
  @opentelemetry/api \
  @opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node \
  @opentelemetry/sdk-metrics
```

To find all autoinstrumentation modules, you can look at the
[registry](/ecosystem/registry/?language=js&component=instrumentation).

### Setup

The instrumentation setup and configuration must be run _before_ your
application code. One tool commonly used for this task is the
[--require](https://nodejs.org/api/cli.html#-r---require-module) flag.

Create a file named `instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js` if not using
TypeScript) , which will contain your instrumentation setup code.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { NodeSDK } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-node';
import { ConsoleSpanExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node';
import { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } from '@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node';
import { PeriodicExportingMetricReader, ConsoleMetricExporter } from '@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics';

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
});

sdk
  .start()

{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.js*/
// Require dependencies
const { NodeSDK } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-node');
const { ConsoleSpanExporter } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-trace-node');
const { getNodeAutoInstrumentations } = require('@opentelemetry/auto-instrumentations-node');
const { PeriodicExportingMetricReader, ConsoleMetricExporter } = require('@opentelemetry/sdk-metrics');

const sdk = new NodeSDK({
  traceExporter: new ConsoleSpanExporter(),
  metricReader: new PeriodicExportingMetricReader({
    exporter: new ConsoleMetricExporter()
  }),
  instrumentations: [getNodeAutoInstrumentations()]
});

sdk
  .start()
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

## Run the instrumented app

Now you can run your application as you normally would, but you can use the
`--require` flag to load the instrumentation before the application code.

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane lang=console >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
$ npx ts-node --require ./instrumentation.ts app.ts
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
$ node --require ./instrumentation.js app.js
Listening for requests on http://localhost:8080
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Open <http://localhost:8080/rolldice> in your web browser and reload the page a
few times. After a while you should see the spans printed in the console by the
`ConsoleSpanExporter`.

<details>
<summary>View example output</summary>

```json
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "middleware - query",
  "id": "41a27f331c7bfed3",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589722992,
  "duration": 417,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "query",
    "express.type": "middleware"
  },
  "status": { "code": 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "middleware - expressInit",
  "id": "e0ed537a699f652a",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589725778,
  "duration": 673,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "expressInit",
    "express.type": "middleware"
  },
  "status": { code: 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "name": "request handler - /",
  "id": "8614a81e1847b7ef",
  "kind": 0,
  "timestamp": 1624982589726941,
  "duration": 21,
  "attributes": {
    "http.route": "/",
    "express.name": "/",
    "express.type": "request_handler"
  },
  "status": { code: 0 },
  "events": []
}
{
  "traceId": "3f1fe6256ea46d19ec3ca97b3409ad6d",
  "parentId": undefined,
  "name": "GET /",
  "id": "f0b7b340dd6e08a7",
  "kind": 1,
  "timestamp": 1624982589720260,
  "duration": 11380,
  "attributes": {
    "http.url": "http://localhost:8080/",
    "http.host": "localhost:8080",
    "net.host.name": "localhost",
    "http.method": "GET",
    "http.route": "",
    "http.target": "/",
    "http.user_agent": "Mozilla/5.0 (Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_15_7) AppleWebKit/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome/91.0.4472.114 Safari/537.36",
    "http.flavor": "1.1",
    "net.transport": "ip_tcp",
    "net.host.ip": "::1",
    "net.host.port": 8080,
    "net.peer.ip": "::1",
    "net.peer.port": 61520,
    "http.status_code": 304,
    "http.status_text": "NOT MODIFIED"
  },
  "status": { "code": 1 },
  "events": []
}
```

</details>

The generated span tracks the lifetime of a request to the `/rolldice` route.

Send a few more requests to the endpoint. After a moment, you'll see metrics in
the console output, such as the following:

<details>
<summary>View example output</summary>

```yaml
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.server.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the inbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: [
    {
      attributes: [Object],
      startTime: [Array],
      endTime: [Array],
      value: [Object]
    }
  ]
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'http.client.duration',
    type: 'HISTOGRAM',
    description: 'measures the duration of the outbound HTTP requests',
    unit: 'ms',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 0,
  dataPoints: []
}
{
  descriptor: {
    name: 'db.client.connections.usage',
    type: 'UP_DOWN_COUNTER',
    description: 'The number of connections that are currently in the state referenced by the attribute "state".',
    unit: '{connections}',
    valueType: 1
  },
  dataPointType: 3,
  dataPoints: []
}
```

</details>

## Next Steps

Enrich your instrumentation generated automatically with
[manual instrumentation](/docs/instrumentation/js/manual) of your own codebase.
This gets you customized observability data.

You'll also want to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export your telemetry data](/docs/instrumentation/js/exporters) to one or more
telemetry backends.

If you'd like to explore a more complex example, take a look at the
[OpenTelemetry Demo](/docs/demo/), which includes the JavaScript based
[Payment Service](/docs/demo/services/payment/) and the TypeScript based
[Frontend Service](/docs/demo/services/frontend/).

## Troubleshooting

Did something go wrong? You can enable diagnostic logging to validate that
OpenTelemetry is initialized correctly:

<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
{{< tabpane langEqualsHeader=true >}}

{{< tab TypeScript >}}
/*instrumentation.ts*/
import { diag, DiagConsoleLogger, DiagLogLevel } from '@opentelemetry/api';

// For troubleshooting, set the log level to DiagLogLevel.DEBUG
diag.setLogger(new DiagConsoleLogger(), DiagLogLevel.INFO);

// const sdk = new NodeSDK({...
{{< /tab >}}

{{< tab JavaScript >}}
/*instrumentation.js*/
// Require dependencies
const { diag, DiagConsoleLogger, DiagLogLevel } = require('@opentelemetry/api');

// For troubleshooting, set the log level to DiagLogLevel.DEBUG
diag.setLogger(new DiagConsoleLogger(), DiagLogLevel.INFO);

// const sdk = new NodeSDK({...
{{< /tab >}}

{{< /tabpane >}}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- markdownlint-restore -->

[traces]: /docs/concepts/signals/traces/
[metrics]: /docs/concepts/signals/metrics/
[logs]: /docs/concepts/signals/logs/
