---
title: Site localization
description: Creating and maintaining site pages in non-English localizations.
linkTitle: Localization
weight: 25
cSpell:ignore: shortcodes
---

The OTel website uses Hugo's [multilingual framework] to support page localizations.
English is the default language, with US English as the default (implicit) localization.
A growing number of other localizations are supported, as can be seen from the languages
dropdown menu in the top nav.

## Translation guidance

We recommend that you follow the guidance offered in this section when
translating pages.

### Heading anchors

To ensure that heading anchor targets are uniform across localizations, when
translating headings:

- Preserve the heading's explicit ID if it has one. [Heading ID syntax] is
  written after the heading text using syntax like `{ #some-id }`.
- Otherwise, explicitly declare a heading ID corresponding to the autogenerated
  ID of the original English heading.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

We leave it to the discretion of localization authors to decide if they add an
explicit heading ID to all headings of translated pages, or whether this is only
done for known intra-site heading targets, as reported by the link checker. The
former option is more uniform and more work. It better supports having
site-external targets into localization pages and avoids having to revisit
previously translated pages as new heading targets are used.

{{% /alert %}}

[Heading ID syntax]:
  https://github.com/yuin/goldmark/blob/master/README.md#headings

### Links

For link references to local paths (as opposed to external links), preserve the
path _as is_. This holds true for links to website pages or section-local
resources such as images.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}

The OTel website repository has a custom render-link hook that Hugo uses to
convert **absolute link paths to documentation pages**. Links of the form
`/docs/some-page` are made locale specific by prefixing the path with the page
language code when rendering the link. For example, the previous sample path
would become `/ja/docs/some-page` when rendered from a Japanese page.

{{% /alert %}}

### Images

Hugo is smart in the way that it renders page images that are shared across site
localizations. That is, in the generated site folder, Hugo will output a
_single_ image file that is then shared across localizations.

So as a general rule, _do not_ make copies of image files in your localization
unless you actually change the image.

### Shortcodes

Some of the base shortcodes contain English text that you might need to localize
-- this is particularly true of those contained in [layouts/shortcodes/docs].

If you need to create a localized version of a shortcode, place it under
`layouts/shortcodes/xx`, where `xx` is your localization's language code. From
there, use the same relative path as the original base shortcode.

[layouts/shortcodes/docs]:
  https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/tree/main/layouts/shortcodes/docs

## Keeping track of localized-page drift {#track-changes}

One of the main challenges of maintaining localized pages, is identifying when
the corresponding English language pages have been updated. This section
explains how we handle this.

### The `default_lang_commit` front-matter field

When a localized page is written, such as `content/zh/<some-path>/page.md`, this
translation is based on a specific [`main` branch commit][main] of the
corresponding English language version of the page at
`content/en/<some-path>/page.md`. In this repository, every localized page
identifies the English page commit in the localized page's front matter as
follows:

```markdown
---
title: Your localized page title
...

default_lang_commit: <commit-hash-of-main-for-default-language-page>
```

The front matter above would be in `content/zh/<some-path>/page.md`. The commit
would correspond to the latest commit of `content/en/<some-path>/page.md` in
`main`.

### Tracking changes to English pages

As updates are made to English language pages, you can keep track of the
corresponding localized pages that need updating by running the following
command:

```console
$ npm run check:i18n
1       1       content/en/docs/kubernetes/_index.md - content/zh/docs/kubernetes/_index.md
...
```

You can restrict the target pages to one or more localizations by providing
path(s) like this:

```sh
npm run check:i18n -- content/zh
```

### Viewing change details

For any given localized pages that need updating, you can see the diff details
of the corresponding English language pages by using the `-d` flag and providing
the paths to your localized pages, or omit the paths to see all. For example:

```console
$ npm run check:i18n -- -d content/zh/docs/kubernetes
diff --git a/content/en/docs/kubernetes/_index.md b/content/en/docs/kubernetes/_index.md
index 3592df5d..c7980653 100644
--- a/content/en/docs/kubernetes/_index.md
+++ b/content/en/docs/kubernetes/_index.md
@@ -1,7 +1,7 @@
 ---
 title: OpenTelemetry with Kubernetes
 linkTitle: Kubernetes
-weight: 11
+weight: 350
 description: Using OpenTelemetry with Kubernetes
 ---
```

### Adding `default_lang_commit` to new pages

As you create pages for your localization, remember to add `default_lang_commit`
to the page front matter along with an appropriate commit hash from `main`.

If your page translation is based on an English page in `main` at `<hash>`, then
run the following command to automatically add `default_lang_commit` to your
page file's front matter using the commit `<hash>`. You can specify `HEAD` as an
argument if your pages are now synced with `main` at `HEAD`. For example:

```sh
npm run check:i18n -- -n -c 1ca30b4d content/ja
npm run check:i18n -- -n -c HEAD content/zh/docs/concepts
```

To list localization page files with missing hash keys, run:

```sh
npm run check:i18n -- -n
```

### Updating `default_lang_commit` for existing pages

As you update your localized pages to match changes made to the corresponding
English language page, ensure that you also update the `default_lang_commit`
commit hash.

{{% alert title="Tip" %}}

If your localized page now corresponds to the English language version in `main`
at `HEAD`, then erase the commit hash value in the front matter, and run the
**add** command given in the previous section to automatically refresh the
`default_lang_commit` field value.

{{% /alert %}}

If you have batch updated all of your localization pages that had drifted, you
can update the commit hash of these files using the `-u` flag followed by a
commit hash or 'HEAD' to use `main@HEAD`.

```sh
npm run check:i18n -- -c <hash> <PATH-TO-YOUR-NEW-FILES>
npm run check:i18n -- -c HEAD <PATH-TO-YOUR-NEW-FILES>
```

{{% alert title="Important" %}}

When you use `HEAD` as a hash specifier, the script will use the hash of `main`
at HEAD in your **local environment**. Make sure that you fetch and pull `main`,
if you want HEAD to correspond to `main` in GitHub.

{{% /alert %}}

### Script help

For more details about the script, run `npm run check:i18n -- -h`.

## New localizations

(Section To Be Completed soon with information about how to propose a new
localization.)

<!--

cSpell:ignore: CODEOWNERSHIP Comms

* Our website supports multiple languages already, so the translated content should live under main/content/<two_letter_code>
* Our point of reference is how kubernetes is doing their localization, see https://github.com/kubernetes/website
* We need at least 2 ppl owning that content, so that changes can be approved (CODEOWNERSHIP will help with that)
* We can start with the translation been hidden until we reach a point where enough material is translated to go live (with maybe some blog post & announcements around it)
* (Please anticipate that this is guidance on not a fixed set of rules)

As stated above this project requires a set of individuals that are happy to take on ownership for their language and work with SIG Comms on implementing this. So any discussion on this page "how to do it" needs to be preceded by a "I volunteer to co-own `<language>`"

-->

[main]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/commits/main/
[multilingual framework]: https://gohugo.io/content-management/multilingual/
