content/en/blog/2022/k8s-metadata/index.md, before:

---
title: Improved troubleshooting using k8s metadata
linkTitle: Kubernetes metadata
date: 2022-06-29
author: '[Ruben Vargas](https://github.com/rubenvp8510)'
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: k8sattributes k8sattributesprocessor k8sprocessor KUBE replicaset resourcedetection
---

Attaching Kubernetes resource metadata to OpenTelemetry traces is useful to
identify which resource (such as a pod) is failing or having performance
problems. It is also useful for correlating across other signals, for example:
you can correlated logs and spans that were generated by the same pod.

In this article, you'll learn how to configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to
use the [k8sattributesprocessor][] in different scenarios.

Details of the OpenTelemetry Collector pipeline won't be covered in this post.
For those details, refer to the [collector documentation](/docs/collector/).

## How K8s attributes are attached

At a high level, K8s attributes are attached to traces as
[resources](/docs/concepts/glossary/#resource). This is for two reasons:

1. K8s attributes fit the definition of what a resource is: an entity for which
   telemetry is recorded
2. It centralizes this metadata, which is relevant for any generated span.

Let's dive in and see how to do it!

## Using k8sattributes processor

This is an OpenTelemetry processor that automatically discovers pod metadata and
attaches it to a resource associated with the spans generated by that pod. If
the pod belongs to a `Deployment` or a `ReplicaSet`, it will also discover it's
attributes.

Some attributes we can attach to the resource are:

- Node name `k8s.node.name`
- Pod name `k8s.pod.name`
- Pod UID `k8s.pod.uid`
- Namespace `k8s.namespace.name`
- Deployment name, `k8s.deployment.name` if the pod was created by a deployment

Such attributes adhere to OpenTelemetry semantic conventions. For details, see
the [Kubernetes resource semantic conventions][].

The processor internally maintains a list of pods and an associated attribute,
usually the IP address of the pod, and uses this attribute to know which pod
generates a certain span.

![k8sattributes processor data flow](k8sprocessor.png)

In the figure above you can see how the data flows: The table of pods is fetched
using Kubernetes API, while the pod IP is extracted from the connection context
between the pod and the collector.

The `k8sattributesprocessor` can work in different modes depending on how the
collector is configured. Let's explore one common scenario, when the collector
is deployed as daemonset.

### Daemonset mode

Let’s take a look at how we can configure the collector in daemonset mode, also
known as an agent mode in the k8sattributes documentation.

When we deploy the collector in daemonset mode, we have one collector pod per
node. We need to configure the collector service account to have permissions to
fetch all pod information. In order to do that, we will create a `ClusterRole`
with the necessary permissions.

Here are the minimum permissions required to make the `k8sattributesprocessor`
work:

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: otel-collector
rules:
  - apiGroups: ['']
    resources: ['pods', 'namespaces']
    verbs: ['get', 'watch', 'list']
```

Next, deploy the collector in daemonset mode. We recommend that you set a filter
to only fetch the pods that belong to the node in which the collector is
deployed. This is because if you have a large cluster, you don’t want to
maintain a huge list of pods.

This is the manifest used in this blog to show how the processor works:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel-collector-daemonset
spec:
  mode: daemonset
  image: ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.47.0
  serviceAccount: attributes-account
  env:
    - name: KUBE_NODE_NAME
      valueFrom:
        fieldRef:
          apiVersion: v1
          fieldPath: spec.nodeName
  config: |
    receivers:
      jaeger:
          protocols:
              grpc:
              thrift_binary:
              thrift_compact:
              thrift_http:
      otlp:
          protocols:
              grpc:
              http:

    processors:
         k8sattributes:
             filter:
                 node_from_env_var: KUBE_NODE_NAME
    exporters:
      jaeger:
        endpoint: jaeger-all-in-one-collector:14250
        tls:
          insecure: true

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp, jaeger]
          processors: [k8sattributes]
          exporters: [jaeger]
```

The main parts to note are that it uses the contrib collector image. The
`k8sattributesprocessor` is not part of the OpenTelemetry Collector core, but
the contrib distribution has it. Other things to notice are the filter mentioned
above, and the use of a previously-created specific service account, which
contains the permissions to fetch the pod list.

Next, deploy the manifest and the [vert.x example app][] to generate some
traces.

![Jaeger UI showing the span attributes](jaeger-k8sattributes.png)

As you can see, each span of the trace now has the corresponding pod attributes
attached to it.

You can restrict the configuration above to a certain namespace if you add the
namespace on the `k8sattributesprocessor` filter like this:

```yaml
processors:
  k8sattributes:
    filter:
      namespace: my_namespace
```

In this way, you can create a `Role` and don’t need to create a `ClusterRole`,
reducing the scope of the collector service account to a single namespace.

## Using Resource detector processor

As of [recently][pr#832], the [OpenTelemetry operator][] sets the
`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable on the collector container with
the K8s pod attributes. This lets you to use the resource detector processor,
which attaches the environment variable values to the spans. This only works
when the collector is deployed in sidecar mode.

For example, if you deploy the following manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: sidecar-for-my-app
spec:
  mode: sidecar
  image: ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.47.0
  config: |
    receivers:
      jaeger:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          thrift_binary:
          thrift_compact:
          thrift_http:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:

    processors:
      resourcedetection:
        detectors: [env]
        timeout: 2s
        override: false

    exporters:
      jaeger:
        endpoint: jaeger-all-in-one-collector:14250
        tls:
          insecure: true

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp, jaeger]
          processors: [resourcedetection]
          exporters: [jaeger]
```

And then deploy the [vert.x example app][], you can see the
`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable gets injected with some values
in the sidecar container. Some of them use the Kubernetes downward API to get
the attribute values.

Here's an example of the value of the environment variable:

```yaml
- name: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
  value: k8s.deployment.name=dep-vert-x,k8s.deployment.uid=ef3fe26b-a690-4746-9119-d2dbd94b469f,
  k8s.namespace.name=default,k8s.node.name=$(OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_NODE_NAME),k8s.pod.name=
  (OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_POD_NAME),k8s.pod.uid=$(OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_POD_UID),k8s.replicaset
  name=dep-vert-x-59b6f76585,k8s.replicaset.uid=5127bc38-e298-40e1-95df-f4a777e3176c
```

## Learn more

This post covers how to configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to attach
Kubernetes resource metadata as resource attributes to OpenTelemetry traces. The
scenarios covered, although basic, illustrate how to add this kind of metadata
to traces so that you can incorporate the technique into other more
sophisticated scenarios. If you want to learn more about different scenarios or
options for configure the processors you can see the [K8sattributes processor
documentation][k8sattributesprocessor] where you can find more scenarios like
sidecar, or when one collector as an agent report to another collector.

## References

- [K8sattributes processor documentation][k8sattributesprocessor]
- [K8sattributes processor RBAC](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/processor/k8sattributesprocessor#hdr-RBAC)
- [OpenTelemetry Kubernetes attributes](/docs/specs/otel/resource/semantic_conventions/k8s)
- [Resource detector processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor/README.md)

[pr#832]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/pull/832
[opentelemetry operator]:
  https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator
[k8sattributesprocessor]:
  https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/processor/k8sattributesprocessor
[kubernetes resource semantic conventions]:
  /docs/specs/otel/resource/semantic_conventions/k8s
[vert.x example app]: https://github.com/jaegertracing/vertx-create-span

Commit message:

Add notice in k8s metadata blog

content/en/blog/2022/k8s-metadata/index.md, after:

---
title: Improved troubleshooting using k8s metadata
linkTitle: Kubernetes metadata
date: 2022-06-29
author: '[Ruben Vargas](https://github.com/rubenvp8510)'
# prettier-ignore
cSpell:ignore: k8sattributes k8sattributesprocessor k8sprocessor KUBE replicaset resourcedetection
---

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} The most up to date information for how
to enhance telemetry with Kubernetes metadata can be found in the docs. See
[Getting Started with Kubernetes](/docs/kubernetes/getting-started/) for more
info. {{% /alert %}}

Attaching Kubernetes resource metadata to OpenTelemetry traces is useful to
identify which resource (such as a pod) is failing or having performance
problems. It is also useful for correlating across other signals, for example:
you can correlated logs and spans that were generated by the same pod.

In this article, you'll learn how to configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to
use the [k8sattributesprocessor][] in different scenarios.

Details of the OpenTelemetry Collector pipeline won't be covered in this post.
For those details, refer to the [collector documentation](/docs/collector/).

## How K8s attributes are attached

At a high level, K8s attributes are attached to traces as
[resources](/docs/concepts/glossary/#resource). This is for two reasons:

1. K8s attributes fit the definition of what a resource is: an entity for which
   telemetry is recorded
2. It centralizes this metadata, which is relevant for any generated span.

Let's dive in and see how to do it!

## Using k8sattributes processor

This is an OpenTelemetry processor that automatically discovers pod metadata and
attaches it to a resource associated with the spans generated by that pod. If
the pod belongs to a `Deployment` or a `ReplicaSet`, it will also discover it's
attributes.

Some attributes we can attach to the resource are:

- Node name `k8s.node.name`
- Pod name `k8s.pod.name`
- Pod UID `k8s.pod.uid`
- Namespace `k8s.namespace.name`
- Deployment name, `k8s.deployment.name` if the pod was created by a deployment

Such attributes adhere to OpenTelemetry semantic conventions. For details, see
the [Kubernetes resource semantic conventions][].

The processor internally maintains a list of pods and an associated attribute,
usually the IP address of the pod, and uses this attribute to know which pod
generates a certain span.

![k8sattributes processor data flow](k8sprocessor.png)

In the figure above you can see how the data flows: The table of pods is fetched
using Kubernetes API, while the pod IP is extracted from the connection context
between the pod and the collector.

The `k8sattributesprocessor` can work in different modes depending on how the
collector is configured. Let's explore one common scenario, when the collector
is deployed as daemonset.

### Daemonset mode

Let’s take a look at how we can configure the collector in daemonset mode, also
known as an agent mode in the k8sattributes documentation.

When we deploy the collector in daemonset mode, we have one collector pod per
node. We need to configure the collector service account to have permissions to
fetch all pod information. In order to do that, we will create a `ClusterRole`
with the necessary permissions.

Here are the minimum permissions required to make the `k8sattributesprocessor`
work:

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: otel-collector
rules:
  - apiGroups: ['']
    resources: ['pods', 'namespaces']
    verbs: ['get', 'watch', 'list']
```

Next, deploy the collector in daemonset mode. We recommend that you set a filter
to only fetch the pods that belong to the node in which the collector is
deployed. This is because if you have a large cluster, you don’t want to
maintain a huge list of pods.

This is the manifest used in this blog to show how the processor works:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: otel-collector-daemonset
spec:
  mode: daemonset
  image: ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.47.0
  serviceAccount: attributes-account
  env:
    - name: KUBE_NODE_NAME
      valueFrom:
        fieldRef:
          apiVersion: v1
          fieldPath: spec.nodeName
  config: |
    receivers:
      jaeger:
          protocols:
              grpc:
              thrift_binary:
              thrift_compact:
              thrift_http:
      otlp:
          protocols:
              grpc:
              http:

    processors:
         k8sattributes:
             filter:
                 node_from_env_var: KUBE_NODE_NAME
    exporters:
      jaeger:
        endpoint: jaeger-all-in-one-collector:14250
        tls:
          insecure: true

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp, jaeger]
          processors: [k8sattributes]
          exporters: [jaeger]
```

The main parts to note are that it uses the contrib collector image. The
`k8sattributesprocessor` is not part of the OpenTelemetry Collector core, but
the contrib distribution has it. Other things to notice are the filter mentioned
above, and the use of a previously-created specific service account, which
contains the permissions to fetch the pod list.

Next, deploy the manifest and the [vert.x example app][] to generate some
traces.

![Jaeger UI showing the span attributes](jaeger-k8sattributes.png)

As you can see, each span of the trace now has the corresponding pod attributes
attached to it.

You can restrict the configuration above to a certain namespace if you add the
namespace on the `k8sattributesprocessor` filter like this:

```yaml
processors:
  k8sattributes:
    filter:
      namespace: my_namespace
```

In this way, you can create a `Role` and don’t need to create a `ClusterRole`,
reducing the scope of the collector service account to a single namespace.

## Using Resource detector processor

As of [recently][pr#832], the [OpenTelemetry operator][] sets the
`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable on the collector container with
the K8s pod attributes. This lets you to use the resource detector processor,
which attaches the environment variable values to the spans. This only works
when the collector is deployed in sidecar mode.

For example, if you deploy the following manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: opentelemetry.io/v1alpha1
kind: OpenTelemetryCollector
metadata:
  name: sidecar-for-my-app
spec:
  mode: sidecar
  image: ghcr.io/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-releases/opentelemetry-collector-contrib:0.47.0
  config: |
    receivers:
      jaeger:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          thrift_binary:
          thrift_compact:
          thrift_http:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
          http:

    processors:
      resourcedetection:
        detectors: [env]
        timeout: 2s
        override: false

    exporters:
      jaeger:
        endpoint: jaeger-all-in-one-collector:14250
        tls:
          insecure: true

    service:
      pipelines:
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp, jaeger]
          processors: [resourcedetection]
          exporters: [jaeger]
```

And then deploy the [vert.x example app][], you can see the
`OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES` environment variable gets injected with some values
in the sidecar container. Some of them use the Kubernetes downward API to get
the attribute values.

Here's an example of the value of the environment variable:

```yaml
- name: OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES
  value: k8s.deployment.name=dep-vert-x,k8s.deployment.uid=ef3fe26b-a690-4746-9119-d2dbd94b469f,
  k8s.namespace.name=default,k8s.node.name=$(OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_NODE_NAME),k8s.pod.name=
  (OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_POD_NAME),k8s.pod.uid=$(OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES_POD_UID),k8s.replicaset
  name=dep-vert-x-59b6f76585,k8s.replicaset.uid=5127bc38-e298-40e1-95df-f4a777e3176c
```

## Learn more

This post covers how to configure the OpenTelemetry Collector to attach
Kubernetes resource metadata as resource attributes to OpenTelemetry traces. The
scenarios covered, although basic, illustrate how to add this kind of metadata
to traces so that you can incorporate the technique into other more
sophisticated scenarios. If you want to learn more about different scenarios or
options for configure the processors you can see the [K8sattributes processor
documentation][k8sattributesprocessor] where you can find more scenarios like
sidecar, or when one collector as an agent report to another collector.

## References

- [K8sattributes processor documentation][k8sattributesprocessor]
- [K8sattributes processor RBAC](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/processor/k8sattributesprocessor#hdr-RBAC)
- [OpenTelemetry Kubernetes attributes](/docs/specs/otel/resource/semantic_conventions/k8s)
- [Resource detector processor](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/processor/resourcedetectionprocessor/README.md)

[pr#832]: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator/pull/832
[opentelemetry operator]:
  https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator
[k8sattributesprocessor]:
  https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/processor/k8sattributesprocessor
[kubernetes resource semantic conventions]:
  /docs/specs/otel/resource/semantic_conventions/k8s
[vert.x example app]: https://github.com/jaegertracing/vertx-create-span
